=head1 NAME

SquidGuard Manager - Web GUI for SquidGuard and SquidClamav administration

=head1 DESCRIPTION

SquidGuard Manager is a Perl CGI Web GUI for squidGuard and SquidClamav administration. It allows full management of SquidGuard blocklist and ACLs. You can also manage graphicaly your SquidClamav configuration.

This program supports all configuration directives of SquidGuard and SquidClamav
without intrusive modification, i-e you can still edit the configuration files
by hand before and after using SquidGuard Manager.

=head1 FEATURES

=head2 SquidGuard Manager GUI interfaces

=over 4

=item Globals

This interface allows you to define SquidGuard global variables.

=item Schedules

This interface allows you to define schedules time in order to use in other
SquidGuard objects (Sources, URL Rewrites, Filters and ACLs).

=item Sources

Use this interface to define sources like users, groups, Ip addresses, range
of Ip addresses or networks to apply policies on. These can be issued from a
list, a file, an ldap query, a mysql query or a command line utility.

=item Url rewriting

This interface allows you to define URL rewriting groups, each consists of
one or more Sed style substitution rules. They can be applied to source groups
in ACLs menu.

=item Filters

Destination Groups filter selector in other words. In this interface you can
shape each group by selecting a list for domain, url or regexp filter from
those you defined in Manage Lists interface.

=item ACLs

This is the central place where you define what source objects follow what
filters and when. Here everything fits together.

=item View Configuration

This interface allows you to see the SquidGuard configuration file.

=item Manage Lists

This interface allows you to build blocklists for each destination group.
You can edit a whole list or add/remove individual entries.

=item View logs

This menu allows you to consult all log files in the log directory you'd
defined in the SquidGuard global configuration.

=item SquidClamav

This link leads you to the GUI interface to administer SquidClamav configuration
file. This interface is enabled only if you have SquidClamav installed on your
system.

=item Restart Squid

This link allows you to 'reconfigure' or quick-restart Squid to make it
recognize the changes you made to SquidGuard and/or SquidClamav configuration.

=back

=head2 SquidClamav Manager GUI interfaces

Since release 1.4 SquidClamav Manager is able to manage both SquidClamav v5.x
and v6.x branch.

=over 4

=item Globals

This interface allows you to manage SquidClamav global variables.

=item Virus Scanning

This interface allows you to exclude URL or Content-Type from virus scan by
defining regexp patterns.

=item Whitelists

Use this interface to define which domain name or site hostname to be
whitelisted, i-e there happens no virus scan nor call to SquidGuard on these
sites.

=item Trusted Users

Use this interface to define which users (RFC-931 usernames) will be excluded
from virus scan and SquidGuard blocklists.

=item Trusted Clients

Use this interface to define which client hostnames or ip addresses will be
excluded from virus scan and SquidGuard blocklists.

=item View Configuration

This interface allows you to see the SquidClamav configuration file.

=item View log

This interface allows you to consult the SquidClamav log file.

=back

In resume SquidGuard Manager is capable of every configuration task on
SquidGuard and SquidClamav which otherwise you have to perform by opening
terminal, editing files, becoming root and running commands manually.
Modifications are written immediately to the configuration files.

=head1 REQUIREMENT

SquidGuard Manager may run on any Unix like OS with any modern Perl installation
using the perl CGI module. It must be run on a proxy server hosting squidGuard.

You need to run this CGI script using Apache HTTP server. And the httpd daemon
must be run as uid and gid holding SquidGuard (most of the time this is
Squid cache effective user/group). This allows SquidGuard Manager to read
and write the configuration files to manage blocklists and acls. If you use
SquidClamav, it must be run under the same user too.

SquidGuard Manager uses some system commands to manage blocklists and log files.
Your system must have the following binaries installed: diff, grep, find, rm
and tail.

=head1 INSTALLATION

To install SquidGuard Manager you must be able to gain root privilege so
that installer script can put files with appropriate permission.

=head2 Prepare your system

SquidGuard Manager needs to have read/write access onto SquidGuard configuration
file and the dbhome directory. It must also have read rights onto the log file.
If you use the SquidClamav Manager GUI it also requires read/write access to the
squidclamav.conf file as well as the log file.

For that reason SquidGuard Manager must be run as the user under which
SquidGuard and SquidClamav are run. Most of the time this is the Squid cache
effective user.

	chown -R squid:squid /usr/local/squidGuard
or
	chown -R squid:squid /etc/squidguard.conf /var/lib/squidguard

To allow httpd to run squidguardmgr.cgi as appropriate user/group you must
edit your httpd.conf file and set the User and Group directives to the user
and group running Squid.

After configuration changes squid ought to be 'reconfigure'd, in other words
quick-restarted. SquidGuard Manager Web GUI does it by using a 'setuid root'ed
wrapper. If your system doesn't support the feature unfortunately, you may need
to do that by hand.

IMPORTANT: SquidGuard Manager doesn't support symbolic links in the SquidGuard
dbhome directory. If it is your case, you need to remove those symbolic links
and modify your squidguard.conf file  so that refers to the real files and
directories.

=head2 Automatic installation

Execute the install script and answer to some questions it asks:

	$ perl Makefile.PL
	$ make
	$ su
	# make install

By default it will install all files into /var/www/squidguardmgr/ and show you
a configuration sample that should be included in your httpd.conf. Also, you
can find some Apache configuration samples in contrib/ directory of the
SquidGuard Manager source repository. Once you have done, restart httpd server
and take a look at http://my.proxy.dom/squidguardmgr/ or
http://my.proxy.dom:port/squidguardmgr/

You can fully customize this installation by passing the following variables
to Makefile.PL:

	SQUIDGUARD => Absolute path to the SquidGuard executable. Set to
	             'off' to disable its support
	CONFFILE => Absolute path to the SquidGuard configuration file
	DBHOME => Absolute path to the SquidGuard DB directory
	LOGDIR => Absolute path to the SquidGuard log directory
	WWWDIR => Absolute path to the SquidGuard Manager base installation
	          directory
	CGIDIR => Relative path from WWWDIR to install CGI script.
	          Default equals WWWDIR
	HTMLDIR => Relative path from WWWDIR to install css, js and
	           image files. Default equals WWWDIR
	LANGDIR => Translation language to use (en_US or fr_FR).
	           Default: en_US
	BASEURL => Path part of the base url to access SquidGuard
	           Manager Web GUI. Default: /squidguardmgr
	SQUIDUSR => User running Squid
	SQUIDGRP => Group running Squid
	SQUIDCLAMAV => Absolute path to the squidclamav binary (v5.x only).
	               Set to 'off' if you won't manage neither v5 nor V6.x
	CICAP_SOCKET => c-icap server control socket (v6.x only)
	SQUIDCLAMAVCONF => Absolute path to squidclamav.conf file

For packaging there's two more configuration variables:

	DESTDIR => Directory prefix where install will be done
	QUIET => Specify with value '1' to suppress post install messages

Example:

	perl Makefile.PL \
	CONFFILE=/usr/local/etc/squidguard.conf \
	DBHOME=/usr/local/squidguard/db \
	LOGDIR=/usr/local/logs/squidguard \
	WWWDIR=/usr/local/apache \
	CGIDIR=cgi-bin/admin HTMLDIR=htdocs/admin \
	LANGDIR=fr_FR BASEURL=/admin \
	SQUIDUSR=squid SQUIDGRP=squid \
	SQUIDCLAMAV=/usr/local/bin/squidclamav \
	SQUIDCLAMAVCONF=/etc/squidclamav.conf \
	QUIET=1

	make
	su
	make install

This will install SquidGuard Manager CGI squidguardmgr.cgi, squidguardmgr.conf,
squid_wrapper and all language files under /usr/local/apache/cgi-bin/admin/. All
SquidGuard Manager css, js and image files will be copied under the directory
/usr/local/apache/htdocs/admin/. Squidguard Manager will expect to find the
SquidGuard configuration file at /usr/local/etc/squidguard.conf and the log
and SquidGuard databases respectively at /usr/local/logs/squidguard and
/usr/local/squidguard/db. All the installed files will be owned by user squid
and group squid. The squid wrapper (used to reconfigure squid after change)
will be setuid root unconditionally.

=head2 Manual installation

Copy all files from the cgi-bin repository into the CGI script directory of
your choice. Check that squidguardmgr.cgi can be executable by your Apache
server and chown the entire directory to the user and group running httpd.

Copy all files from the htdocs repository into your DocumentRoot directory or
any other subdirectory and check that they can be read by your httpd server.

Edit the squidguardmgr.conf file in your cgi directory and check that all
paths conforms to your installation.

If you want to be able to reload Squid redirector from the GUI interface after
your SquidGuard and/or SquidClamav modification, you must compile and install
the squid_wrapper with suid root into the squidguardmgr cgi directory.

Before compilation you may need to edit squid_wrapper.c and change the
SQUID_BINARY definition to point correctly to your squid binary.

Then as root:

	cd squid_wrapper/
	cc -o /path/squidguardmgr/cgi/squid_wrapper squid_wrapper.c
	chown root.root /path/squidguardmgr/cgi/squid_wrapper
	chmod 755 /path/squidguardmgr/cgi/squid_wrapper
	chmod u+s /path/squidguardmgr/cgi/squid_wrapper

=head1 CONFIGURATION

SquidGuard Manager needs some configuration. They are stored in the
squidguardmgr.conf file. During the automatic installation this file
will be generated automatically.

=over 4

=item SQUIDGUARD    /usr/local/squidGuard/bin/squidGuard

This directive allows you to configure the path to the SquidGuard program. If
you set it to off or no, the SquidGuard Manager interface will be disabled and
it will only show the SquidClamav Manager interface.

=item CONF_FILE     /usr/local/squidGuard/squidguard.conf

Configure the path to the SquidGuard configuration file.

=item SQUIDCLAMAV   /usr/bin/squidclamav | c-icap

Path to the SquidClamav program when using SquidClamav v5.x branch and must be
set to 'c-icap' when you're using v6.x branch.

=item C_ICAP_SOCKET   /var/run/c-icap/c-icap.ctl

Path to the c-icap control socket. Used by SquidClamav Manager to reconfigure
the c-icap server to apply SquidClamav configuration changes. Used only with
SquidClamav 6.x branch.

=item SC_CONF_FILE  /etc/squidclamav.conf

Path to the SquidClamav configuration file.

=item LANG          en_US

Used to set the language, default is en_US.
Current available LANGs are: en_US, fr_FR.

=item SQUID_WRAPPER /var/www/squidguargmgr/squid_wrapper

Command wrapper to reload Squid. Why you need this wrapper is because only root
can do it. This wrapper will execute the following system command as root user:

	/path/to/squid/bin/squid -k reconfigure

=item IMG_DIR      /squidguargmgr/images

Path part of SquidGuard Manager URL where images are found.

=item CSS_FILE     /squidguargmgr/squidguardmgr.css

SquidGuard Manager URL to point to the Style Sheet(CSS) file.

=item JS_FILE      /squidguargmgr/squidguardmgr.js

SquidGuard Manager URL which points to Javascript(js) file.

=item LOG_LINES   1000

Number of last lines out of log files to display.

=item DNSBL        your.preferred.blacklist.com,other.preferred.blacklist.com

Comma separated list of DNS Blacklists. If you have SquidGuard 1.5 or above put
here the DNSBLs you want to use.

=item TAIL, FIND, DIFF, RM, GREP

These optional configuration directives are used to override the default path
to the system commands /usr/bin/tail, /usr/bin/find, /usr/bin/diff, /usr/bin/rm
and /usr/bin/grep.

=item KEEP_DIFF

This enables record of added/removed items from squidGuard blacklists in diff
files which can be used to recover changes after a fresh download of blacklists.
Default value is 1, enabled. Set it to 0 to disable this feature.

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Gilles Darold <gilles @nospam@ darold.net>

Tatsuya Nonogaki <winfield @nospam@ support.email.ne.jp>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2010-2013 Gilles Darold - All rights reserved.

	This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
	it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
	the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
	any later version.

	This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
	but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
	MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
	GNU General Public License for more details.

	You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
	along with this program.  If not, see < http://www.gnu.org/licenses/ >.

=head1 BUGS

Your volunteer to help construct a better software by submitting bug report or
feature request as well as code contribution are welcome.


